Edits (Rmd files 1-2) (#83)
jhudsl/Computing_for_Cancer_Informatics: 02-Computing_Basics.Rmd

# Basic Building Block of Computers

> First, in this chapter and the next, we would like to start off with some background information about how computers work. We feel that this information will be very helpful in understanding what computing resources your research will actually require. This information will also help you to better discuss your computing needs with computing experts - for example, with people who manage shared computing resources that you might want to use. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, in this chapter and the next, we would like to start off with some background information about how computers work. We feel that this information will be very helpful in understanding what computing resources your research will actually require. This information will also help you to better discuss your computing needs with computing experts - for example, people who manage shared computing resources that you might want to use. 
```

## Transistors

Luckily, you are likely not going to need to become a bee keeper to perform your computational research (unless of course that interests you)! Instead of a bunch of bees, computers rely on millions to billions of [transistors](https://www.physlink.com/education/askexperts/ae430.cfm) [@transistor_count].

> [Transistors](https://www.physlink.com/education/askexperts/ae430.cfm) are some of the most, if not the most, important basic building blocks of computers. There are many different types of transistors, but a typical transistor often looks like a rectangle with three prongs [@how_transistors_work].  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Transistors](https://www.physlink.com/education/askexperts/ae430.cfm) are one of the most, if not the most, important basic building blocks of computers. There are many different types of transistors, but a typical transistor often looks like a rectangle with three prongs [@how_transistors_work].

```{r, fig.align='center', echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "Anatomy of a transistor, the rectangular part of the transistor contains silicon and metal underneath a plastic insulating layer. It does not allow much current unless the transistor is on.", out.width= "100%"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.gf6e632d05f_0_315")
```

If the transistor receives a small amount of current to one of the prongs called the __base__, this turns the transistor on, and allows the larger current for the circuit to pass through the transistor, from a prong called the __collector__ to a prong called the __emitter__.

```{r, fig.align='center', echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "The transistor can turn on our of depending on if a small current is applied to the prong called the base. Another prong is called the collector which receives the current from the circuit and the final prong is called the emitter. It emits the current from the circuit if the transistor is on.", out.width= "100%"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.gf6e632d05f_0_296")
```

> If the base prong of the transistor does not receive the tiny current, then the transistor is turned off, not allowing the larger current for the circuit to flow through the transistor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the base prong of the transistor does not receive the small current, then the transistor is turned off, not allowing the larger current for the circuit to flow through the transistor.
```

```{r, fig.align='center', echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "Ligand-gated ion channels, such as those found in neurons, will open and allow ions through the cellular membrane only if a ligand like a neurotransmitter has bound to the channel protein. We can think of this like the current applied to the base prong of a transistor that activates the transistor and allows current to flow from one side of the transistor to the other (from the collector to the emitter). See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ligand-gated_ion_channel for more information.", out.width= "100%"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.g1077711c9e7_301_0")
```

> The two states for the flow of current ultimately allow for the storage and use of binary data, which we think of zeros and ones (0/1), but it is really the absence or presence of current with a voltage beyond a set threshold for that specific part of the circuit. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two states for the flow of current ultimately allow for the storage and use of binary data, which we think of a s zeros and ones, but it is really the absence or presence of current with a voltage beyond a threshold for this part of the circuit. 
```

```{r, fig.align='center', echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "Simplified illustration of how transistors work. If the transistor is given a digital data input of 1, it allows current to flow through, with a digital output of 1. Alternatively, if the the transistor is given a digital data input of 0, it does not allow current to flow through - with a digital output of 0.", out.width= "100%"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.gf6e632d05f_0_147")
```

> Thus, the physical components of a computer are ultimately based on the assessment of only two states of current (0 or FALSE) = below a threshold; 1 or TRUE = above a threshold), which is much easier to create than if it we needed to assess more nuanced levels of current. It turns out that this binary encoding of current as digital data is the basis for all the complex tasks for which we use computers every day.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, the physical components of a computer are ultimately based on the assessment of only two states of current (0 or FALSE) = below a threshold; 1 or TRUE = above a threshold), which is much easier to create than if we needed to assess more nuanced levels of current. It turns out that this binary encoding of current as digital data is the basis for all the complex tasks for which we use computers every day.  
```

```{r, fig.align='center', echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "Anatomy of a transistor, the rectangular part of the transistor contains silicon and metal underneath a plastic insulating layer. It does not allow much current unless the transistor is on.", out.width= "100%"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.gf6e632d05f_0_315")
```

> If the transistor receives a tiny current in one of the prongs called the __base__, it is turned on, allowing another, larger current for the circuit to pass through the transistor, from a prong called the __collector__ to the prong called the __emitter__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the transistor receives a small amount of current to one of the prongs called the __base__, this turns the transistor on, and allows the larger current for the circuit to pass through the transistor, from a prong called the __collector__ to a prong called the __emitter__.
```

ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.gf6e632d05f_0_296")
```

If the base prong of the transistor does not receive the tiny current, then the transistor is turned off, not allowing the larger current for the circuit to flow through the transistor.

```{r, fig.align='center', echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "Depiction of two transistors, one is one and one is off. The one that is one receives current to the base prong and allows the current for this part of the circuit to pass through. The transistor that is off does not receive current to the base prong and thus the current that comes into the transistor from the circuit does not pass through", out.width= "100%"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.gf6e632d05f_0_328")
```

> You may see how this is similar to ligand-gated ion or ionotropic channels in biological systems, where a channel remains closed and does not allow ions to pass through the membrane unless a ligand (such as a neurotransmitter) binds to the channel protein, allowing the channel to open [@ligand-gated_2021; @ligand-gated_2011] and allowing ions to flow through the channel. In this case, the small electrical flow through the base prong acts somewhat like the ligand signal in the gated ion channel, activating the transistor so current can flow through the collector and emitter prongs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may see how this is similar to ligand-gated ion or ionotropic channels in biological systems, where a channel remains closed and does not allow ions to pass through the membrane unless a ligand (such as a neurotransmitter) binds to the channel protein, allowing the channel to open [@ligand-gated_2021; @ligand-gated_2011] and allowing ions to flow through the channel. In this case, the small electrical flow to the base prong acts somewhat like the ligand signal in the gated ion channel, activating the transistor so current can flow through the collector and emitter prongs.
```

> AVOCADO: I love the metaphor! I tried elaborating on the explanations - not 100% sure if it's accurate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[[Source](https://unsplash.com/photos/9paY25EHOBo)]

> Inside the plastic surface is often [silicon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicon), or some other semiconductive crystal. A __semiconductive__ crystal means that it has an intermediate property of conducting electricity (conductivity) – it conducts electricity more easily than conductors (such as copper) and less easily than insulators (such as wood). Semiconductive materials are needed because they way they conduct electricity can be modified by the application of more electricity, making them the perfect option for creating an electrical switch. Silicon is especially useful because, unlike previously used materials, it doesn't cause the circuit to get very hot. It is also very abundant - in fact, it is the second most common element of the Earth's crust! [@Wikipedia_Silicon].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside the plastic surface is often [silicon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicon), or some other semiconductive material. A __semiconductive__ material has an intermediate property of conducting electricity (conductivity) – it conducts electricity more easily than conductors (such as copper) and less easily than insulators (such as wood). Semiconductive materials are needed for transistors because the way that they conduct electricity can be **modified** by the application of more electricity, making them the perfect option for creating an electrical switch. Silicon is especially useful because, unlike previously used materials, it doesn't cause the circuit to get very hot. It is also very abundant - in fact, it is the second most common element of the Earth's crust! [@Wikipedia_Silicon].
```

> Inside the plastic surface is often [silicon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicon), or some other semiconductive material. A __semiconductive__ material has an intermediate property of conducting electricity (conductivity) – it conducts electricity more easily than conductors (such as copper) and less easily than insulators (such as wood). Semiconductive materials are needed for transistors because the way that they conduct electricity can be **modified** by the application of more electricity, making them the perfect option for creating an electrical switch. Silicon is especially useful because, unlike previously used materials, it doesn't cause the circuit to get very hot. It is also very abundant - in fact, it is the second most common element of the Earth's crust! [@Wikipedia_Silicon].

Reviewer: Inside the plastic coating is often [silicon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicon), or some other semiconductive material. A __semiconductive__ material has an intermediate property of conducting electricity (conductivity) – it conducts electricity more easily than conductors (such as copper) and less easily than insulators (such as wood). Semiconductive materials are needed for transistors because the way that they conduct electricity can be **modified** by the application of more electricity, making them the perfect option for creating an electrical switch. Silicon is especially useful because, unlike previously used materials, it doesn't cause the circuit to get very hot. It is also very abundant - in fact, it is the second most common element of the Earth's crust! [@Wikipedia_Silicon].

Finally, it is important to note that modern transistors have a 3D structure that allows them to be faster, more efficient, and more densely packed. Now, circuits can be layered in 3D structures, allowing for even more transistors to be included within modern computers [@finfet_2021].

## ALU - Arithmetic Logic Unit

The ALU is responsible for performing simple operations by using networks of transistors.

These simple operations include logical operations (AND, OR, NOT, etc.), and arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, division, multiplication, etc.).  

Ultimately most of what we do everyday on our computers comes down to these simple operations.

These operations are based on what is called [Boolean logic or Boolean algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_algebra), which was invented by George Boole in 1854 and largely comes down to thinking of possible sets of data [@explainthatstuff; @Wikipedia_boolean_2021]. For example, if we have two transistors, they could both be on, they could both be off, or one or the other could be on. Considering these possibilities, we can make overall descriptions about the flow of current to perform logical operations.
 

> Let's take a moment to understand how networks of transistors work for AND and OR operations, which will be described shortly. We call a network for a logical operation a **logic gate** [@Wikipedia_logic_gate_2021]. Note that this is a simple illustration and in actual electronics, additional transistors are often used for greater sustainability, consistency, efficiency, and speed, to control the level of current and voltage in more nuanced ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take a moment to understand how networks of transistors work for AND and OR operations, which will be described shortly. We call a network for a logical operation a **logic gate** [@Wikipedia_logic_gate_2021]. Note that this is a simple illustration and in actual electronics, additional transistors are often used for greater sustainability, consistency, efficiency, and speed, largely to control the level of current and voltage in more nuanced ways.
```

> In this illustration of the transistor [AND gate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AND_gate), the two transistors in which the current is flowing through are in series. This means the transistors are sequentially placed one after the other, so that one receives current first before the other. In this situation, a high current output from the system only occurs when **both** of the transistors allow for the flow of current. If either transistor is off or both of the transistors are off, then the current is not allowed to flow through, and the resulting digital output is zero [@Wikipedia_AND_gate_and_2021]. In other words, the AND gate allows the current to flow through if both Transistor 1 **AND** Transistor 2 allow it to.

Reviewer: ```suggeston
In this illustration of the transistor [AND gate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AND_gate), the two transistors in which the current is flowing through are in series. This means the transistors are sequentially placed one after the other, so that one receives current first before the other. In this situation, a high current output from the system only occurs when **both** of the transistors allow for the flow of current. If either transistor is off or both of the transistors are off, then the current is not allowed to flow through, and the resulting digital output is zero [@Wikipedia_AND_gate_and_2021]. In other words, the AND gate allows the current to flow through if both Transistor 1 **AND** Transistor 2 allow the current to do so.
```

[[Source](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Moore%27s_Law_Transistor_Count_1971-2018.png)]

> Both the **smaller size** of the transistors and the **increased number** of transistors have in part allowed computers to become faster and more powerful [@Pokropivny2007]. Transistors are a key reason why we have seen such an explosion of computing power and storage, which has facilitated the incredible expansion of data that we have seen through history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
Both the **smaller size** of the transistors and the **increased number** of transistors have in part allowed computers to become faster and more powerful [@Pokropivny2007]. Thus transistors are a key reason why we have seen such an explosion of computing power and storage, which has facilitated what we have seen in the incredible more recent expansion of data that we have seen.
````

> Both the **smaller size** of the transistors and the **increased number** of transistors have in part allowed computers to become faster and more powerful [@Pokropivny2007]. Thus transistors are a key reason why we have seen such an explosion of computing power and storage, which has facilitated what we have seen in the incredible more recent expansion of data that we have seen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both the **smaller size** of the transistors and the **increased number** of transistors have in part allowed computers to become faster and more powerful [@Pokropivny2007]. Thus transistors are a key reason why we have seen such an explosion of computing power and storage, which has facilitated the incredible expansion of data that we have seen more recently.

If you would like to learn more about the history of transistors and how they work check out this [website](https://www.explainthatstuff.com/howtransistorswork.html) [@woodford_how_2007].

Finally, it is important to note that modern transistors have a 3D structure that allows them to be faster, more efficient, and more densely packed. Now, circuits can be layered in 3D structures, allowing for even more transistors to be included within modern computers [@finfet_2021].

## ALU - Arithmetic Logic Unit

> The ALU is responsible for performing simple operations by using networks, in this case commonly called a __circuit__, of transistors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ALU is responsible for performing simple operations by using networks of transistors.
```

> AVOCADO: Is “circuit” an official word for this term, or just a common term? I was a little confused reading this part.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Flip-flops and registers

> Flip-flops are used for storing one bit of digital binary data. They are made of transistors (that's right, transistors again!) and capacitors in a configuration that allows for the flip-flop to hold one of two states, thus enabling the storage of binary data [@Wikipedia_flip-flop_2021; @Wikipedia_memory_2021].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flip-flops are used for storing one bit of digital binary data (a single 0 or 1 value). They are made of transistors (that's right, transistors again!) and capacitors in a configuration that allows for the flip-flop to hold one of two states, thus enabling the storage of binary data [@Wikipedia_flip-flop_2021; @Wikipedia_memory_2021].
```

> A group of flip-flops is called a register [@Wikipedia_register_2021]. You may have heard about a computer having a 64- or 32- bit operating system (more on this soon). These computers have registers with 64 bits or 32 bits, respectively; again, a __bit__ here represents a binary unit. There are 64 flip-flops within the registers of a [64-bit](https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/num/64bit.htm) system [@ComputerHope_64-bit]. Each of these are capable of storing and processing binary values 64 digits in length (which works out to an unsigned integer in our decimal system of up to 2^64-1, or 18,446,744,073,709,551,615)[@ComputerHope_64-bit]! 

Reviewer: A group of flip-flops is called a register [@Wikipedia_register_2021]. You may have heard about a computer having a 64- or 32- bit operating system (more on this soon). These computers have registers with 64 bits or 32 bits, respectively; again, a __bit__ here represents a single unit of binary data (0 or 1). There are 64 flip-flops within the registers of a [64-bit](https://www.computerhope.com/jargon/num/64bit.htm) system [@ComputerHope_64-bit]. Each of these are capable of storing and processing binary values 64 digits in length (which works out to an unsigned integer in our decimal system of up to 2^64-1, or 18,446,744,073,709,551,615)[@ComputerHope_64-bit]!

ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1B4LwuvgA6aUopOHEAbES1Agjy7Ex2IpVAoUIoBFbsq0/edit#slide=id.gf6e632d05f_0_187")
```

> In the ASCII system, this ultimately works out to letters being stored by a standard 8 binary digits (or bits) [@Wikipedia_ascii_2021]. A group of 8 bits (8 digits of zeros and or ones) is called a byte [@computerhope]. Since this is consistent, this works well with computers that have registers that can store in sets of 8 bits. In fact, that is indeed how most computers work today. The "64-bit" part of what is called a 64-bit computer indicates what is called the [word size or word length](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Word_(computer_architecture)), which is the maximum unit of data that the computer can work with at a time [@Wikipedia_word_length_2021]. This means that it can process binary numbers of up to 64 digits in length. Since 64 divided by 8 is 8, this means for a 64-bit computer, each register could store up to 64 bits or binary digits and thus can store 8 binary bytes. Note that it is possible to combine registers to make  computations with larger numbers. Since each letter or symbol is encoded by a byte (8 bits), this means up to 8 letters or symbols can be stored by a single register at a time. Other computers may work with a 32-bit word size, meaning that the registers can accommodate only 4 bytes at a time or 32 binary digits. As you might guess 64-bit computers are more capable of faster speeds and greater precision (by giving more decimal places) when computing operations with values that are larger than 32 binary digits, as compared to such operations using a 32-bit computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the ASCII system, this ultimately works out to letters being stored by a standard 8 binary digits (or bits) [@Wikipedia_ascii_2021]. A group of 8 bits (8 digits of zeros and or ones) is called a __byte__ [@computerhope]. Since this is consistent, this works well with computers that have registers that can store in sets of 8 bits. In fact, that is indeed how most computers work today. The "64-bit" part of what is called a 64-bit computer indicates what is called the [word size or word length](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Word_(computer_architecture)), which is the maximum unit of data that the computer can work with at a time [@Wikipedia_word_length_2021]. This means that it can process binary numbers of up to 64 digits in length. Since 64 divided by 8 is 8, this means for a 64-bit computer, each register could store up to 64 bits or binary digits and thus can store 8 binary bytes. Note that it is possible to combine registers to make  computations with larger numbers. Since each letter or symbol is encoded by a byte (8 bits), this means up to 8 letters or symbols can be stored by a single register at a time. Other computers may work with a 32-bit word size, meaning that the registers can accommodate only 4 bytes at a time or 32 binary digits. As you might guess 64-bit computers are more capable of faster speeds and greater precision (by giving more decimal places) when computing operations with values that are larger than 32 binary digits, as compared to such operations using a 32-bit computer.
```

Note that ASCII has largely been replaced since 1991 for [Unicode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode), which allows for more characters, supporting languages like Chinese that require far more characters than the 256 that ASCII could support [@Wikipedia_unicode_2021]. However Unicode works in a similar way[@Wikipedia_unicode_2021].

> Keep in mind that ALUs can only work with binary data. All different types of data like letters, words, numbers, code, etc. ultimately get encoded as 0s and 1s first for the computer to work with; then, after the computations are made, the computer translates the data back to numeric, alphabetic, or other form of data easier for us to understand. Computers do a lot of data conversions!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that ALUs can only work with binary data. All different types of data like letters, words, numbers, code, etc. ultimately get encoded as 0s and 1s first for the computer to work with. Then, after the computations are made, the computer translates the data back into a form that is easier for us to understand. Computers do a lot of data conversions!
```

```

Again, if you want to watch another [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VBDoT8o4q00), this optional video that we told you about earlier explains how transistors are used to add numbers together. In this video you will see that many transistors (and several logic gates) are needed to even do a simple calculation of 1 + 1. You will also learn that more complicated summations just require more transistors arranged in a similar manner. 

## Conclusion

We hope that this chapter has given you some more knowledge about what computers are physically made of, and how they operate.

In conclusion, here are some of the major take-home messages:

1) Computers rely on millions to billions of tiny transistors
2) Transistors act like electrical switches that allow for the storage and processing of digital binary data
3) Binary data is essentially the encoding of current states in the hardware of a computer as zeros and ones

> 4) As transistors got smaller, more transistors were included in computers, and computers became faster and more powerful (also due to other additional reasons)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4) As transistors got smaller and more transistors were included in computers, computers became faster and more powerful (also due to other additional reasons)
```
